---
layout: blog_post
title: Have Respect for Sleep
excerpt: It's been well demonstrated that quality of sleep has a significant effect on mood and mental ability. Our desire to sleep is governed by hormones and our own biological clock. I argue that it's better to err on the side of too much sleep than the alternative.
---

<p>The currently accepted scientific model, for all it's inability to explain sleep debt, does a good job of explaining the phenomenon of sleepiness. It says there are two entities governing our sleep cycle: one is our own biological clock, the circadian rhythm, and the other is a host of hormones which can be divided into sleep-inducing and wakefulness-inducing categories. I like to think of these two systems as two independent cyclical functions that relate energy with time of day (anything other than cyclical is certainly deadly).</p>

<p>Consider a person who has been deprived of all sensory stimulation. Experiments showed that these people would still feel sleepy at predictable times in the day. This is a result of our internal biological clock, or circadian rhythm. The circadian rhythm is a personal cycle of energy that may be influenced by outside factors such as sunlight and food consumption. Anyone who's lived through jet lag understands the arduous task of staying awake despite what their circadian rhythm tells them.</p>

<p>The other system consists of two groups of hormones which are always trying to stay in balance. One group of hormones makes you feel sleepy and the other group makes you feel awake. The longer you go without sleep, the larger the buildup of sleepiness-inducing hormones. The longer you sleep, the larger the buildup of wakefulness inducing hormones. Through this negative feedback loop, some semblance of homeostasis appears.</p>

<p>If your goal is to be productive, generate value, get rich and famous and buy a beachside house, then I claim you should desire a sleep habit where your two energy cycles have constructive interference instead of destructive interference. This is wholly based on the premise that the best results come from periods of high intensity work. Since it is not plausible to control hormonal secretion, the best plan is to make the most of the self-correcting nature of the hormonal system. In other words, the traditional one-sleep-a-day routive provides one set of maximum and minimum points on the cyclical graph. By evenly distributing sleep throughout the day, one can induce more cycles of the cyclic function. Given the diminishing returns from sleeping all day long, the popular routine of a mid-day nap seems to be a bright idea. </p>

<p>The circadian rhythm, as anyone who has travelled to Asia will tell you, is controllable given the right amount of persistence. It can be observed that the circadian rhythym is quite flexible given reasonable amounts of sleep (again, consider that jet-lag is essentially a shift in your sleep itinerary rather than a reallocation of sleeping and awake time). Therefore, there are benefits to having regular times set aside for sleeping. </p>

<p>Sleep is important because it consolidates the things you learn and prepares your brain for a brand new day. The landscape of your brain is similar to a block of computer memory in that the longer one stays awake, the harder it is to access portions of your memory. This is because as stimulus is processed, neural pathways are augmented though the majority of these augmented pathways are low-value and are a hinderance, During deep sleep, the important pathways are consolidated and the less useful ones are discarded. Similar to cooking, the consolidated pathways are like the apple pie and the discarded pathways are representative of the mess on the kitchen from the cooking process. Sleep essentially cleans the kitchen so that we may bake some more tomorrow. Sleep also plays a role of compressing information. The essential points and unusual characteristics are compressed as part of the augmentation process. This makes it possible to see the big picture clearly and is the main reason for the "sleep on it" adage.</p>

<p>It's much better to err on the side of excessive sleep because it there is not a performance penalty associated with sleeping too much, whereas there is certainly a performance penalty from sleeping too little. This undesirable penalty will be obstructing your abilities for the entire day. By oversleeping, there will be a higher level of wakefulness hormones which yields a longer period of alertness before feeling sleepy again whereas by sleeping too little, the period of time before sleepiness will be much shorter. Respect your sleep.</p>
