---
layout: blog_post
title: Carol Dweck ~ Mindset
excerpt: I've often heard about Carol Dweck's research into the characteristics of fixed mindset and growth mindset people. Her book presents a the two mindsets and makes a rather biased analysis about the advantages of each.
---
<p>Carol Dweck proposes two mindsets that people can take towards difficulties in life. People are either growth-minded, a group which believes in their own change and become better, or are fixed-minded, a group defined by a belief that their abilties and potentials are static and cannot be improved upon.</p>
<p>"Be like water." This quote from Bruce Lee embodies the growth mindset, where failures are approached as a stepping stop to success. People who are fixed minded subscribe to the belief that failing is a minor setback that can be overcome with hard work. In fact, hard work is seen as the holy panacea that can overcome all but the most stubborn obstructions. Carol Dweck tells the story of Christopher Reeves, who regained limited motor control after he became paralyzed from the neck down from a horse riding accident. Those with growth mindset are optimists who look at each situation, trying to maximize takeaways. Growth minded people might have a weak sense of self because they are constantly moving and upgrading.</p>

<p>On the other side of the spectrum is the fixed mindset people. These people, in contrast to the growth minded people, can be considered to have a strong sense of self because they have a strong set of beliefs that govern who they are and are reluctant to question them. Whether if they were tagged as pretty or ugly, smart or stupid, these fixed minded people have incorporated these beliefs about themselfs into their own image. They approach everything in life with their beliefs as a baseline measurement of their abilities and by proxy, an estimator of their performance. For example, Carol Dweck picks the example of a kid who has been told from a young age that he has a talent for solving arthmetic problems quickly and is probably a genius. The kid is quick to take accept this viewpoint because kids love compliments and like to feel special. Unwittingly, the kid also accepted the belief that if he is unable to quickly solve arithmetic problems, then he is probably not a genius. The kids seeks self validation; whenever he solving an arithmetic problem, he must find the solution quickly to prove to himself that he is indeed who he thinks, a genius. Sooner or later, the negative belief will manifest itself in the kid's actions when the arithmetic becomes more difficult and takes a long time to solve. The kid will be adverse towards attempting harder problems or taking challenges because he is worried he can't solve it quickly, a failure that will reduce him from his elevated position as a genius to the average position of normal kid.</p>

<p>Besides the tendency of the fixed-minded child to sabotage himself by avoiding challenges, those who are fixed minded tend to sabotage both themselved and others around them to prserve their internal status quo. The fixed minded use a tactic called self-handicapping, where they they hinder themselves in some way so that when they ultimately fail, they have a excuse. The fixed minded also have it in their self interest to sabotage their competitors. If they feel outperformed, their internal status quo is challenged which yields anxiety. Stepping up and improving is an open option for growth minded people, but not for fixed minded people, so the only way to stop the anxiety is to sabotage everyone else. Beware of fixed-mindset bosses.</p>

<p>I mentioned this book is biased towards growth mindset. It so turns out there is not a single drawback mentioned about the growth mindset, so I will provide one. </p>

<p>The growth mindset does appear to be superior in every aspect to the fixed mindset, in theory. In some cultures (looking at you, China/Japan) the growth mindset is seen as disrespectful since someone with the growth mindset is trying to rise beyond their position in society. It seems absurd that someone who tries to improve their situation in life can be interpreted as disrespectful; it seems only logical. However, for someone to improve their life, usually by taking some influential position, someone else must lose their position. For someone's situation to improve, someone else's position must deteriorate. 'Disrespectful' is really a veiled way of saying 'threatening.' Naturally, the people currently sitting in cushy positions are in favor of maintaining the status quo and therefore are disdainful towards those overly ambitious growth-minded peons. Growth-mindedness ought to be approached sensibly with discretion.</p>
